.\" (C) Copyright 2001 Alex King (alex@king.net.nz)
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Fri Apr  6 01:27:28 NZST 2001 Alex King <alex@king.net.nz> initial release
.\" Sat Apr  7 10:20:53 NZST 2001 Alex King <alex@king.net.nz> cleaned up
.\" with the help of Colin Watson
.\"
.TH nflog-acctd 8 "16 Dec 2001"
.SH NAME
nflog-acctd \- network accounting daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nflog-acctd 
.IB [ \-dD "] [" \-c " filename]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nflog-acctd
logs network traffic in a format suitable for generating billing
information or usage statistics.
.B nflog-acctd
listens on network interfaces and periodically writes information
to a log file.

.B nflog-acctd
is configured by editing its configuration file,
.BR /etc/nflog-acctd.conf .

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -d
This will let nflog-acctd run in debug mode
.TP
.B -D
This will make nflog-acctd not to detach as a daemon, suitable for running it
from inittab.
.TP
.B -c 
.I configfile
Specify the path of an alternative config file.

.SH FILES
.TP
/etc/nflog-acctd.conf
Configuration file
.TP
/var/log/nflog-acctd/account.log
Default location for the main output file
.TP
/var/log/nflog-acctd/dump
Default location for the dump of data not yet written to the main
file.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
The full documentation for
.B nflog-acctd
is maintained as a Texinfo manual.  If the
.B info
and
.B nflog-acctd
programs are properly installed at your site, the command
.IP
.B info nflog-acctd
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual.
.SH CAVEATS
This manual page is incomplete, and possibly inaccurate.
.SH AUTHORS
Hilko Bengen
